13|1|1|Jambur|1|Background The environmental and social policies of the World Bank (WB) and European Investment Bank (EIB) require the Gambia Electricity Restoration and Modernization Project (GERMP) to conduct an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) with an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) in line with WB’s Operational Policy/Bank Procedure 4.01, Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and EIB’s Environmental and Social Standard 1, Assessment and Management of Environmental Social Impacts and Risks (ESS1). Other applicable WB policies and EIB standards are indicated in section 4.1.3. Where policy discrepancies exist in the implementation of this project, the relevant policies that are more stringent will prevail. GERMP Project Description and Development Objective The project development objective (PDO) is to increase the availability and reliability of electricity supply through solar energy and improve NAWEC’s capacity to dispatch variable renewable electricity. It is one of three components of the Gambia Electricity Restoration and Modernization Project (GERMP) which is the focus of this ESIA.1 The GERMP is a $121 million multi-donor funded project involving the World Bank (WB), European Union (EU), and the European Investment Bank (EIB). Specifically, the WB and EIB are supporting development of the solar PV plant and the reinforcement of some transmission and distribution networks within the Country. The solar component will involve the development of a 20 MW on-grid solar PV plant on a 23ha plot of land allocated by the Ministry of Lands and Regional Governments (MOLRG), at Jambur in the West Coast Region (WCR) of The Gambia. This site is believed to be capable of hosting the necessary installations for such capacity of power generation. Project Elements Specifically, the proposed solar PV plant will consist of the following main components: i. Solar field: Main components of the PV power plant or “solar field” consists of a large group of semiconductors technology-based silicon solar cells arranged in what is known as solar PV panel or solar module. The solar panels will convert impinging sunrays (photons) to electrons, whose flow generates direct current (DC) which gets collected and channelled into an “inverter” to convert the DC current into Alternating Current (AC), the form of electricity usable by consumers. ii. Racking: These are structural components which support the PV panels. They could be fixed or movable using a “tracking system”. iii. Tracking: This is a mechanical system attached to the racking system which enables it to track the sun’s movement during the day. It could be a single or dual axis tracking system. iv. Other electromechanical system components include cables, inverters, transformers, and switchgear used to control and condition the power output of the solar field. 1 The GERMP consists of three components. This ESMP covers only Component 1, the on-grid solar plant. 1. Component 1: On-grid solar photo voltaic plant with battery backup 2. Component 2: Transmission and distribution (T&D) upgrades 3. Component 3: Institutional strengthening and project implementation support v. Other ancillary facilities: Buildings, including substations, guard cabin, office, sanitary facilities and spare parts storage; site access road and internal access network; water supply; drainage etc. Project Activities a) Activities expected during the planning and construction phase • Preparation of a detailed design for the project • Land clearing and preparation of production area • Transportation of the various project components to the site • Installation of panels, inverters and batteries • Building of transformer, control, storage and other utility rooms • Connecting the solar plant to the NAWEC grid b) Activities expected during the operations phase • Management of the electricity production • Cleaning of panels and maintenance of other fixtures • Cleaning and clearing site of vegetation that have regrown c) Activities expected during the decommissioning phase • Dismantling of installations • Transportation of equipment and materials away from site • Management of disused elements and the site after use for the solar plant Assessment of Project Alternatives Alternative Sites The original GERMP concept outlined two site options for the solar PV component; the current proposed project of about 23ha in Jambur, to accommodate a 20 MW plant, or three to four plants of 3-6MW at various sites. In addition, the draft feasibility study report for the Solar PV Plant mentioned two other potential alternative sites adjacent to the Brikama Power Stations, but these were not explored by NAWEC. The Jambur site was ultimately the preferred site option because of the difficulty in the availability of the requisite type and size of land at 3-4 different sites within the Greater Banjul Area (GBA) and WCR, among other reasons. Choice of Design Options The choice for the design of the solar PV Plant is based, among other things, on the available budget for the planned 20 MW DC capacity, which has determined the choice of technology adopted in this project. Essentially, the choice is based on market practices, operational risks and technology maturity, which means that this preferred option of technology will attempt to maximise the planned DC capacity. Whilst there are other options to select from, the designers recommended that whichever option is selected, it should be well backed-up by corresponding securities and warranties to mitigate for high operational risks. Regarding the choice of components and sizing therefore, the design analysed the types and cost of the materials including modules, inverters and mounting system. The “No Project” Alternative The alternative of having the project, particularly with full implementation of the environmental and social safeguards, will create a more favourable scenario over the “No Project” alternative. The positive impacts of the Project will enhance the socio-economic development of the Country, enhance access to electricity services to communities, and contribute to the reduction of greenhouse gas production related to the use of hydrocarbons for electricity generation. Potential Positive Impacts With effective and efficient project implementation, the following benefits are expected: 1. A large number of experts and unskilled workers (mainly men) will be employed on the project, with associated social benefits and improved living standards as elaborated in Section 6.2 2. Economic development and income generation from renewable energy supply will benefit the entire Country, including the project affected persons. Like other citizens, PAPs will benefit from development programmes possible as a result of general enhancement of the national economy from available energy for services and production; and savings from the use of renewable energy. 3. The Gambia’s use of locally available renewable resources will reduce its dependence on imported and expensive fossil fuels. 4. The common problems associated with air pollution, oil and oily sludge wastes from petroleum powered generators will be avoided. 5. Temporary economic improvement of women in the immediate vicinity of the project site will be attained through commercial activities targeting project workers as is common in most major construction sites such as the proposed solar project. 6. With continuous electricity supply in Jambur, the youth could develop skills and trade including welding, carpentry, or other small businesses that rely on electricity to enhance their livelihood. 7. Employment creation for technology transfer and capacity building of NAWEC staff and relevant stakeholders in managing the solar installations will be improved for sustainability. There will also be possibilities for employment of the youth of Jambur at the facility when labour is sourced locally 8. Installation of the first utility on-grid solar plant in The Gambia will significantly contribute to the promotion of Jambur in terms of improved potential and development. 9. Education, health, communications and other social services that are largely dependent on electricity will be improved; with availability of electricity both locally and nationally, students will be able to stay up longer to read, and other social services such as health centers, clinics and national communication infrastructure will be more efficient. 10. Contribution to the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions and other air pollutants through renewable energy will be enhanced. Roles and Responsibilities for ESMP Implementation The implementation of this ESMP will be the overall responsibility of NAWEC, and more specifically, the PCU. Other stakeholders will also play important roles, although these will have to be initiated by the PCU or NEA as the coordinating and oversight bodies respectively. NEA, with support from the EIA Working Group will be responsible for overall external monitoring of the ESMP implementation. NEA’s mandate is to monitor the national environment, and so in collaboration with the PCU environmental safeguard specialists, can also monitor compliance with the Banks’ policies as they relate to the environmental aspects of this project. In addition, NEA will provide technical support and participate in training and sensitization of stakeholders to enhance understanding of the national and the Banks’ environmental safeguard instruments. Although the NEA has inadequate capacity to monitor the social aspects interlinked with the environment, it is required by the National Environment Management Act, 1994, that NEA liaises with any necessary institution (ministries, departments, agencies, non-governmental and intergovernmental organizations etc.) to ensure that all environment related concerns are addressed during planning and implementation. Institutions represented in the EIA Working Group, on full-time or ad hoc basis as necessary, may also include those specialised in social aspects such as the Women’s Bureau, Department of Social Welfare, Department of Labour, and Department of Health Services amongst others. Meanwhile, monitoring implementation of the social aspects of the project in line with the Bank’s safeguard instruments will be the responsibility of the PCU social safeguards specialist. At the preparatory stage of the works, other national institutions will also be required to offer mainly technical advice and/or regulatory information; the Department of Forestry (DOF) and Department of Parks and Wildlife Management (DPWM) will eventually be responsible for all forest and biodiversity related issues respectively, especially in view of the close proximity of the solar field to the Bamba Forest Park. The Department of Physical Planning and Housing (DPPH) and Department of Lands and Surveys (DLS), under the Ministry of Lands and Regional Governments (MOLRG), will be addressing resettlement issues. The Local Authorities and PAPs are also relevant during the preparatory stage of the works, as they can provide valuable information to assist in the planning of the works. In addition, the Ministry of Petroleum and Energy (MOPE) and the Public Utility Regulatory Authority (PURA) will respectively provide policy oversight and standards regulation over NAWEC. A local NGO, Association of Farmer Educators and Trainers (AFET), is the independent watchdog.|2025-03-11 13:59:13.0000000 +00:00|8|D309& D6530 -GM|GERMP Solar
14|2|1|LaminKoto-Diabugu|46|Project Background This report is the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) of the proposed Medium Voltage (MV) Transmission and Distribution (T&D) line and other ancillary services along the Laminkoto-Diabugu Batapa road corridor in the Central River and Upper River Regions. It was prepared by Sustainable Development Focus (SD Focus) Ltd, a Gambian registered environment and natural resources consultancy firm, in consultation with the Environmental and Social team at NAWEC PIU. The ESIA study of the proposed line routing is based on the Consultant’s Contract Terms of Reference. The pre-feasibility studies have not yet been completed, and once the Contractor for the works has been selected, a Contractor’s ESMP (C-ESMP) be prepared based on the final technical design; the C-ESMP should be cleared by GERMP/PIU and the World Bank before the start of construction. The proposed works are a sub-component of the Gambia Electricity Modernization and Restoration Project (GERMP). The GERMP is a $121 million multi-donor funded project involving the World Bank (WB), European Union (EU) and the European Investment Bank (EIB). Specifically, the WB and the EIB are financing this sub-component, and therefore, this ESIA is based on the World Bank Operational Policy/Bank Procedure (OP/BP 4.01) (Environmental assessment), EIB’s Environmental Social Standards (ESS 1) (Assessment and management of environmental and social impacts and risks), as well as the relevant national policies. Project Development Objective The development objective of GERMP is to improve the operational performance of the National Water and Electricity Company (NAWEC), by improving its power generation capacity and efficiency of its transmission network in order to increase access to electricity for socio-economic development. Rationale for the ESIA Implementing the project activities are likely to generate negative impacts (physical, biological and/or social) including loss of vegetation and deforestation, soil erosion, wildlife and biodiversity, social conflicts, economic and physical displacement, as well as health and safety risks. The rationale for preparing an ESIA along this corridor is to evaluate and mitigate the potential environmental and social risks and impacts that the construction activities will cause. The process will involve examining ways to prevent, minimize, mitigate, or offset/compensate for adverse impacts, and to enhance positive impacts throughout project implementation. This will enhance sustainability throughout the lifecycle of the project and beyond. An Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) which addresses and mitigates the risks and impacts is included in Chapter 7. The ESMP will identify specific mitigation measures, costs, and responsibilities for mitigation and monitoring. In addition, the National Environment Management Act (NEMA), 1994, requires that an ESIA, and an ESMP must be prepared to guide the implementation of the project activities. The general framework for the assessment and management of environmental and social safeguards of developments projects in the Gambia is provided in the NEMA, 1994, the EIA Guidelines and EIA Procedures of 1999, and the EIA Regulations, 2014. Moreover, the EIB and WB require the development of an ESIA with an ESMP. Where policy conflicts occur between the national policies and the WB’s OP/BP 4.01 and EIB’s ESS1, the policies of the lenders will prevail. OVERVIEW OF THE GERMP Components of GERMP The investments financed by the GERMP project are being implemented under 3 components with potential safeguards impacts; these are: 6 Component 1: On-grid solar PV This will finance a 20MW solar PV plant on a 31ha plot of land situated in the village of Jambur in West Coast Region (WCR). Component 2: Transmission and Distribution (T&D) Upgrades This component will upgrade the existing T&D network to: • absorb the additional generation capacity • prepare for future capacity expansion including OMVG (the Gambia River Basin Development Organization) and other pipeline projects • reduce T&D losses • enable future grid extension This component will also provide a new MV/LV line and substation between Laminkoto and Diabugu, which is the focus of this report. Component 3: Off-grid solar PV. This would install solar PV with battery backup equipment in schools and health clinics in The Gambia. Sub-Project Description and Location Specifically, the proposed route of the T&D line is along the Laminkoto-Passamas road corridor in the northern bank of the country for a distance of 57km, terminating in Diabugu Batapa, (see Figure 2.1 below). The T&D line spans the Districts of Sami in Central River Region (CRR) and Sandu in the Upper River Region (URR). The trajectory of the transmission lines will follow the road alignment, running parallel to it, and in many cases, poles are not more than 15 meters from the edge of the road. The CRR is the second most important region after the WCR in terms of electricity usage, with a population of 185,500 inhabitants. However, there is no electricity power supply between Laminkoto 7 and Diabugu Batapa; creation of the new MV/LV lines and substation between these two communities will be a vital link, completing the network loop in CRR north, and connecting the Bansang and Basse networks. The substation in Bansang will serve Laminkoto, whilst the substation in Basse will supply Diabugu Batapa; this will promote the development of small businesses, reduce rural exodus, reduce illegal migration to Europe, and improve livelihoods in general. Basse Local Government Area (LGA) in URR has a population of 240,000, and currently Basse supplies Diabugu Batapa in Sandu District, representing the largest electricity consumers in the north bank of Basse. Technical Components of the Project Characteristics of the proposed transmission network will include an operating voltage of 33kV covering 57Km of line connecting Laminkoto and Diabugu Batapa, via about 80 transformers (50kVA -160 kVA) mounted on concrete poles (see Figure 4.7). The transformers are used to transform electric power from MV (33Kv) to the LV (400-volt (V) distribution system which is appropriate for use in private compounds and homes. Movement of MV power will involve the use of transmission lines which consist of steel wires, cross bars, insulators, and conductors. The standard right of way (ROW) width for transmission lines is 6m (3m on each side of the centerline); the required setback from nearest structures is 2m horizontal. There is no approved vertical setback; therefore, the lines cannot be constructed over existing structures. The standard and maximum span distances between transmission poles are 75m and 100m, respectively. The height of transmission poles will be a minimum of 10m, and the maximum height will depend on site-specific conditions and topography. Transmission poles will be erected on concrete foundations approximately 1 to 2m in diameter. Most of the foundation will be buried, with areas for bolting on the pole exposed above the ground. Following erection of the pole, the cross bar and insulators will be installed, and the conductors pulled from one pole to the next. Project Activities The following activities are expected to be carried out at various stages of project implementation: During the planning and construction phase • Preparation of a detailed design for the project (including location of structures along the route) • Land clearing of vegetation, for base camp, to erect poles; felling/pruning of trees; digging foundation trenches etc. • Transportation of the various project components to the various work sites and locations • Stringing and connecting the lines to the poles During the operations phase • Management of the electricity production • Periodic clearing of vegetation and pruning of trees that have regrown During the decommissioning phase • Dismantling of base camp and installations • Transportation of equipment and materials away from base camp and pole sites • Management of disused elements and the pole sites 8 Assessment of Project Alternatives Alternative Project Sites Extension of electricity to the Districts of Sami and Sandu is in line with NAWEC’s policy goal of supplying electricity to all parts of the country in phases, especially in the face of resource constraints. Thus, it plans a gradual expansion of electricity coverage in the country, as resources become available, until it attains its ultimate objective of reaching universal access to electricity. It is on the basis of this plan that the two Districts have been selected for coverage under the GERMP, and with the availability of additional transmission capacity, NAWEC will consider other parts of the country for connection. Thus, along this corridor, it is expected that developments in power supply can improve the foundation for job creation especially for youth,and reduce economic migrants (backway syndrome) including for those who are vulnerable and disadvantaged such as women, and in the process contribute to the national goal of poverty reduction and boosting shared prosperity. Along the road alignment is the ROW, (3 meters in width on either side of the road), which could potentially be the route of the lines. Any other alternative routing away from the ROW would potentially encroach into virgin land and/or forest and vegetated areas including some Community Forest Parks which are located further back away from the ROW. Creating another ROW to accommodate the lines will entail more vegetation and forest clearing, as well as impacting settlements through which the lines will pass. Thus, the project’s social and environmental footprints will be lesser along the existing ROW than an alternative routing. Thus, the obvious choice to locate the lines will be preferable along either side of the road alignment using the existing ROW, but the left side (from Laminkoto to Diabugu) presents the least potential environment and social impact: • The left side has fewer trees likely to be impacted compared to the right side which has some indigenous protected species such as the baobab, and several Community Forests • the right side has more communities likely to be impacted; several private properties are less than 5 meters from the edge of the road, whilst the communities on the left side of the road from Laminkoto can be by-passed The “No Project” Alternative Under a “No Project” alternative scenario, the environmental and social impacts from the project will not occur. However, project benefits are expected to outweigh potential adverse impacts. The positive impacts of the project, as discussed in Chapter 6, will enhance the socio-economic development of the country, enhance access to electricity services to communities, and improve livelihoods and social development outcomes. Specifically, without continuous electricity supply in the Sami and Sandu Districts, the youth would not be able to develop skills and trades such as welding, carpentry, or other small businesses that rely on electricity to enhance their livelihood. In addition, women would not be able to produce ice blocks and cold drinks made from locally available plants such as “wonjo” (hibiscus juice), which are few of the livelihood skills they wish to undertake. Potential Positive Impacts With the implementation of the project, the following benefits are expected: 1. Unskilled workers (mainly men) will be employed during the construction of the poles and stringing of lines, with the associated social benefits and improved living standards as a result of increased income. It is not usual in Gambia for women to be involved in such works, particularly within T&D construction; however, the project will ensure that both women and men can apply for employment opportunities without any impediments put in the way of women. 9 2. Economic development and income generation from the supply of electricity will benefit specifically the population living along the line corridor, and generally the entire country. Specifically, women could be involved in the preparation and sale of food items (“wonjo” or hibiscus juice, pancakes, roasted ground nuts, etc.) to the workers, as this is a common practice in construction sites. 3. With continuous electricity supply in the Sami and Sandu Districts, the youth could develop other skills and trade to enhance their livelihood; such skills and trade will include welding, carpentry, or other small businesses that rely on electricity. Women could also benefit by producing ice blocks and cold drinks made from locally available plants such as “wonjo”. 4. Education, health, communications and other social services that are largely dependent on electricity will be improved; with availability of electricity both locally and nationally, students will be able to stay up longer to read, and other social services such as health centers, clinics and national communication infrastructure will be more efficient. ESMP IMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING ARRANGEMENTS Roles and Responsibilities for ESMP Implementation PIUImplementation of this ESMP is the responsibility of the Contractor and WUC. Most of the mitigation measures as indicated in Chapter 7 are the responsibility of the Contractor who will be carrying out the works according to the C-ESMP that will be based on the project ESIA/ESMP. The GERMP/PIU will be responsible for overall follow-up, and to ensure that the ESIA/ESMP will be fully implemented with the support of the PIU environmental and social specialists. Specific mitigation measures to be implemented by the GERMP/PIU are inclusion of clauses in the Contractors’ agreements to ensure compliance, ensure development of the RAP, and coordination of the GRM among others. However, communities will also have an responsibility of ensuring villagers avoid work sites and report, to NAWEC, issues of concern related to the Project, although PIU and contractor will engage the community regularly as an oversight measure in this regard, and conduct sensitization sessions to ensure communities are aware of reporting measures and understand project risks. As the Secretariat of the EIA Working Group1, and supported by its members, NEA will be responsible for overall external monitoring of the ESMP implementation in collaboration with the PIU environmental and social safeguard specialists, monitoring compliance with the Banks’ policies as they relate to the environmental aspects of this project. In addition to the permanent members, in the EIA Working Group, other institutions on ad hoc basis will include those specialized in social aspects such as the Women’s Bureau, Department of Social Welfare, Department of Labour, and Department of Health Services amongst others. Meanwhile, monitoring implementation of the social aspects of the project in line with the Banks’ safeguard instruments will be the responsibility of the PIU social safeguards specialist. NEA will also provide technical support and participate in training and sensitization of stakeholders to enhance understanding of the national and the environmental and social safeguard instruments of the WB and EIB. Technical advice and/or regulatory information and support will also be provided by the Department of Forestry (DOF) for all forest related issues; the Department of Physical Planning and Housing (DPPH) and the Department of Lands and Surveys (DLS) will be responsible for addressing resettlement issues. The Local Authorities and potential PAPs will be relevant during the preparatory stage of the works, as they can provide valuable information to assist in the planning of the works. Below is the breakdown of the institutional arrangement in ESMP implementation.|2025-03-11 13:59:13.0000000 +00:00|8|D309& D6530 -GM|GERMP BB1
15|2|1|WCR, KM and LRR|9|1.0 Introduction and Overview of the Project The proposed Gambia Electricity System Rehabilitation and Expansion Project (GESREP) is to be funded by the African Development Bank (AfDB) to contribute to the Government of The Gambia’s (GoTG’s) goal of increasing electricity access through the provision of reliable electricity and strengthening of the institutional systems of the National Water and Electricity Company (NAWEC). Considering the aging electricity infrastructure and consequential transmission and distribution losses, the GESREP aims to construct new substations, rehabilitate existing substations and upgrade low voltage lines with the accompanying secondary substations and transformers. The proposed enhancement of NAWEC’s Customer Service Department through an increase in the number of Customer Service Centers and the provision of improved data management infrastructure aims to reduce the commercial losses that continue to affect NAWEC’s performance. 1.1 Project Goal and Objectives The main goal of the Project is to increase access to electricity through enhanced operational and financial performance of NAWEC. The objectives of the GESREP include: - i. promoting social development through increased access to reliable electricity; ii. increasing the billing and revenue collection capacity of NAWEC for enhanced financial performance; iii. contributing to the rebuilding and recovery of the economy of The Gambia during and post Covid-19 Pandemic; iv. enhancing skills and the institutional structures within NAWEC for efficient service delivery; v. promoting healthy and safe environments for workers and the public. 1.2 Rationale of the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) The ESIA is a legal requirement under the National Environment Management Act (NEMA) 1994 and the EIA Regulations of 2014 providing the need for environmental and social impact assessment of prescribed projects before project implementation. Schedule A of NEMA lists the projects that are likely to create adverse environmental and social impacts as requiring an ESIA and these include the installation of electrical infrastructure. Proposed activities of the GESREP such as construction or rehabilitation of substations and distribution networks, and related technical workshops clearly fall under this Schedule. Other project activities such as construction of the Customer Service Centers, Data Center Computerized Plant Management System and gender segregated toilets in the NAWEC Headquarters are expected to have minimum impacts, and independently would not have legally required an ESIA. However, the ESIA will address the Project as a whole and all activities considered. As the Project is financed by the AfDB, it is also a requirement under AfDB’s Integrated Safeguards System (Operational Safeguard 1: Environmental and Social Assessment) to carry out ESIA of such projects. The method used in developing the ESIA includes literature review, reconnaissance site visits and stakeholder consultations. 1.3 Project Components and Activities i. Construction of two new substations in Tanji and Faraba The new substations will include the construction of boundary fences and rainwater drainage systems, installation of transmission and distribution infrastructure (transformers, poles and cables), construction of operating room and accompanying facilities such as water supply and toilets. ii. Upgrade of two existing substations at Brikama Medina II and Jabang The upgrade of the substations will include land preparation, transportation and installation of new transformers and the accompanying control systems. Both sites have existing 5kV capacity and will be upgraded to 10KV with an additional 5kV transformer. iii. Construction of five New Customer Service centres The new Customer Service Centers (Brikama, Basse, Soma, Bwiam, Brusubi) will involve the construction of buildings that will accommodate customer services and staff welfare facilities. Customer services include purchase of cash-power and payment of water bills; application for new services; requests for repairs and replacement of equipment; receipt and management of complaints relating to supply and billing; provision of other relevant information requested on the activities of NAWEC. iv. Data Center and Computerized Plant Management System at Fajara The Data Center and Computerized Plant Management System will manage, control, track maintenance and evaluate performance of energy systems amongst others, with the use of computer software. The project will include the construction of buildings and installation of equipment for the relevant power management systems from computers and electronic storage equipment to control panels and switchboards. v. Rehabilitation and upgrade of low voltage infrastructure Transmission and distribution infrastructure within the Greater Banjul Area (GBA) will be mounted to reduce the load in these areas. These will include 20 secondary transformers and accessories (medium voltage fuse cut-out systems for transformer protection and safety; surge arrestors for protection against lighting surges and other electrical network system disturbances vi. Technical workshops in Fajara (pole plant, transformer workshop, welding workshop, stores) All the technical workshops and the stores are located at the site of the NAWEC Booster Station in Fajara and are presently occupied by the existing respective workshops. vii. Gender segregated toilet facilities in the NAWEC Headquarters There are 45 toilets in the NAWEC Headquarters in Kanifing and currently the same facilities are used by both men and women. The Project will include the renovation of these toilets to upgrade the standard and segregate men and women toilets. 1.4 Project Alternatives The Project Option: The option of having the project will create positive impacts to the beneficiaries through increased access to reliable energy and consequently promote national development and the economy in agriculture, health, communication, tourism, education and other sectors. Along the benefits will be potential negative impacts on environmental and social aspects of the Project’s Area of Influence. These include loss of income, public and occupational health and safety risks including communicable diseases, violence against vulnerable groups, sexual abuse and harassment, exploitation and child employment. Negative environmental impacts include effects of localized air pollution, risk of blocking rainwater runoff, localized soil pollution from oil spillage and effects of improper waste management on health and the landscape. Within the option of having the Project, some alternative site and design options will be considered to manage the impacts. These include: i. prioritizing the existing needs for infrastructural rehabilitation and expansion of services based on status of structures and demand needs. Therefore, the areas requiring more urgent action have been chosen; ii. targeting existing NAWEC property to utilize space effectively and reduce the impact of involuntary resettlement; iii. choosing amongst two sites at Faraba, the area that is more central to the users and has topography that is flatter to suitably accommodate the substation was chosen; iv. replacing the Customer Service Center originally proposed for Jambanjelli with the Bwiam Customer Service Center due to likely complications in acquiring the land that is not owned by NAWEC. The Bwiam site is owned by NAWEC and had already been identified as requiring a customer care center due to the increasing high client base in the surrounding areas. v. technologies and designs chosen to promote efficiency and health and safety at work including mechanical handling systems, transformer recycling equipment and gender segregated toilets as compared to the current options used. The ‘Null Project’ Option: The ‘Null Project’ alternative is the case whereby the Project is not implemented and there will be no negative environmental or social impact, nor any benefits. Not having the Project will mean the Project Development Objectives will directly be lost with indirect effect on other services dependant on electricity. Considering that the GESREP is likely to have moderate adverse impacts which can be prevented or mitigated with implementation of the ESMP, it is concluded that the benefits of implementing the Project outweigh the risks.|2025-03-11 13:59:13.0000000 +00:00|8|ADF-16 and TSF-|GESREP ESIA
16|1|1|LRR, NBR & CRR|137|Background This report is the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) of the four ECOWAS-Regional Electricity Access Project (REAP) feeders that emanate from the Soma Sub-Station under the OMVG Energy Project. The report is based specially on the 137 additional communities that have been identified by NAWEC for electrification, and all communities along these transmission corridors that may be affected by the subproject activities. This is in addition to the assessment of an initial 274 communities in 21 Districts in the three Regions. The REAP Project is part of a Series of Projects (SOP) being implemented within the ECOWAS region, with a long-term view to achieving electricity distribution expansion within the Region. Funded by the IDA/World Bank, the SOP aims to increase the number of people in West Africa with access to reliable and affordable electricity, as articulated in the ECOWAS White Paper of 2006 for Increasing Access to Energy Services to People of the Sub-region. The SOP consists of two Phases, which plan to provide 2.5 million people across six countries in West Africa, namely Guinea-Bissau, Niger, Mali, Senegal, Mauritania and The Gambia with electricity. Phase I of the SOP is to provide access to 1.1 million people in Guinea-Bissau, Mali, and The Gambia. This Phase will finance the expansion of Medium Voltage (MV) and Low Voltage (LV) networks from the two high-voltage 225/33 kV substations (in Soma, Lower River Region–LRR, and in Brikama, in West Coast Region–WCR) being built under the OMVG Energy Project in The Gambia. It is expected that this will transform the power sectors of these countries and enable them to achieve their common objective of delivering more power to more consumers. The second Phase of the SOP will finance the reinforcement and extension of a similar distribution network (MV and LV) in Senegal, Niger, Cote d’Ivoire, Mali, and Mauritania, and within the context of the ECOWAS White Paper of 2006, additional member countries will be included later (potentially through additional financing). The participating countries will benefit from attracting larger contractors to ensure timely implementation, and furthermore, the regional approach facilitated by ECOWAS will be used to disseminate lessons learned from the World Bank’s global access experiences, which will be shared with participating countries to implement the access agenda. Description of the Project In The Gambia, the geographical extent of the project covers a maximum of 100 km radius from the OMVG Energy Project ’s substation in Soma in Lower River Region (LRR). Specifically, the scope of the works will include: 1. construction of 33/30 kV Medium Voltage (MV) lines 2. construction distribution substations of 33/30 kV / 400 Volts (V) 3. construction of 400 V Low Voltage (LV) lines 4. supply and installation of last-mile connection equipment, including service drops, prepaid meters, and ready boards for LV customers. Policy, legal and institutional framework The National Policy Framework The policies that will guide the implementation of the project include the following: i. National Development Plan (2018-2021) ; the principal national policy plan which proposes to increase the national coverage of electricity in the country ii. National Energy Policy (2014 – 2018) which aims Policy aims to increase electricity coverage nationally iii. Gambia Environment Action Plan, GEAP (2019-2029): Provides guidance in general environmental planning and natural resources management iv. The National Electricity Road Map (2017-2021 Road Map): It plans to improve power generation and transmission capacity of the National Water and Electricity Company (NAWEC). In addition, it aims to increase absorption capacity for the expected increase in generation capacity, and to reduce transmission and distribution losses v. Forestry Policy (2010-19) and the National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP), 2015 both of which promote State and community forest and biodiversity management. The Legal Framework This includes the following: i. National Environment Management Act, 1994 - the principal legislation in environmental management; Part V of Act provides for certain projects listed under Schedule A to be considered for ESIA, and it includes this Project ii. Environmental Quality Standards Regulations 1999 sets the standards in Schedule 1 in respect of ambient air, saline waters, surface fresh waters and groundwater iii. Biodiversity and Wildlife Act, 2003: provides for the establishment of protected areas for protection of in-situ biodiversity; in addition to protect ex-situ biodiversity iv. National Council for Arts and Culture Act, 2003 Act protects and preserve, restore any monument, relic, ethnographical article, or other article of archaeological ethnographical, or historical relevance. Project activities could unearth objects of historical relevance v. Land Acquisition & Compensation Act, 1990: Provides for consultation, resettlement, and compensation of land. World Bank Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project These include: i. OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment (including public participation and stakeholder engagement). The objective of this policy is to ensure that project s financed by the Bank are viable and environmentally feasible. It covers the impacts on the physical environment (air, water, and land, etc.); the living environment, health, and safety of populations; physical cultural resources; and environmental concerns at cross-border and global level ii. OP 4.04 Natural Habitats: Aims at protection, maintenance, rehabilitation of natural habitats and their functions. There are swamps, wetlands, and waterbodies along the Project corridor that are home to various invertebrates, mammalian, including avian fauna iii. OP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources: Avoid or mitigate adverse impacts on physical cultural resources iv. OP 4.12 Involuntary resettlement of populations: Aims to avoided where feasible or minimized. Where it is not feasible to avoid resettlement, develop RAP, providing sufficient investment resources to enable the persons displaced by the project to share in project benefits, among other things. v. OP 4.36 Forests: This Policy aims to harness the potential of forests to reduce poverty in a sustainable manner, integrate forests effectively into sustainable economic development, and protect the vital local and global environmental services and values of forests. The project is challenged by this OP as there are Forest Parks, and Community Forests that may be affected by its implementation. Institutional Framework The institutional framework relevant to the implementation of this project includes the following: i. National Environment Agency: The NEA enforces the NEMA, 1994 and EIA Regulations 2014, and reviews the ESIA report to grant Environmental Approval for the Project ii. National Water and Electricity Company (NAWEC): Project proponent, and will lead implementation of the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) iii. Women’s Bureau-Under the Ministry of Women, Children and Social Welfare, specifically promotes gender equity and women’s empowerment in The Gambia. It ensures the rights of women affected by the Project are protected; participates in sensitization on gender issues during pre-construction, construction, and operation phases iv. Department of Social Welfare: Protects and promotes the rights of vulnerable people such as children, women and the disabled; supports and guides the process during related grievances; participates in sensitization on GBV, SEA, SH, VAC, etc. v. Department of Labor: Enforces employment laws to protect employee rights, protect against child labor, and respond to complaints and reports such as accidents, abuse, and discrimination at work. Description of the baseline environmental and social issues The Biophysical Environment Physical environmental conditions including climate, hydrology (surface and ground water), topography and infrastructure were described to provide baseline for future reference. The vegetation type includes Riparian, Mangrove and Savannah vegetation; Fruits trees such as mango and cashew trees are also common in the Project area. Some of the most important Fauna in the Project area have been identified including mammals, avifauna, and reptiles, with their respective statuses on the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) red list for due conservation and protection. The Human Environment The baseline socioeconomic conditions of the affected communities include description of the modes of subsistence and daily chores in the project ’s area of influence such as gardening, trading, livestock rearing and fishing. Potential environmental and social impacts and risks  Potential impacts during pre-construction and construction phase  Negative impacts on the biophysical environment During activities of the pre-construction phase, no potential positive impact is anticipated on the biophysical environment. During the construction phase however, potential negative impacts on the biophysical environment will include: • impacts relating to geology and soils such as soil instability, landscape open to erosion, loss of vegetation on the land to be mined, compaction of access routes • air pollution • noise and vibration nuisance • unsightly landscape • improper waste • deforestation • loss of fruit trees and other vegetation • negative impacts on fauna such as resettlement due to disturbance or loss of sanctuaries and sources of food, and loss of fauna from hunting • Risks to Occupational Health and Safety (work place incidents/accident)  Negative impacts on the human environment • Involuntary resettlement and loss of livelihoods • Negligence of vulnerable groups and Gender-Based Violence (GBV) • Risks to Public Health and Safety • Negative impacts from Violence Against Children (VAC) • Risks to Occupational Health and Safety • Risks of Communicable Diseases • Community Instability and Reduced Cohesiveness (Including Impacts from Labor Influx) • Impacts on sites of cultural and historical significance such as loss or destruction of sensitive artifacts, conflict or breakage of social cohesion resulting from the loss or disturbance of sites of religious or traditional importance such as cemeteries and praying facilities.  Positive impacts on the biophysical environment There are no potential positive impacts of significance on the biophysical environment during the construction phase.  Positive impacts on the human environment • Creation of temporary jobs • Income generation • Improved community cohesiveness.  Potential impacts during operation and maintenance phase  Negative impacts on the biophysical environment • Effects of extreme weather affect applied loads and cause structural failure of various parts • Impacts on landscape- waste from disused and worn-out materials such as poles, lines will create eyesores if not collected from the sites and managed properly • Loss of Trees, especially fruit trees during pruning of trees • Loss of fauna, especially monkeys on non-insulated cables amputating limbs • Large birds with wider wingspans (such as certain eagles, waterfowl, cranes, hawks, and vultures) may get electrocuted or killed in contact with lines during flight or resting on the lines.  Negative impacts on the human environment • Risks to public health and safety where people encounter broken live lines during operation leading to electrocution or death • Occupational health and safety risks during all works, including operation and maintenance activities, workers are at risk of accidents from machinery, traffic, and illnesses. These include exposure of work crew to the risk of falling from heights during maintenance and repair of lines and accessing high trees during pruning Negative impacts on public services particularly during connection to the main substation and pole-mounted transformers, when there will be temporary disruption of power services to existing customers.  Positive impacts on the biophysical environment • Impact on Climate Change is positive since source of power is renewable and thus no greenhouse gases produced.  Positive impacts on the human environment • Employment generation • Enhanced economic development as a result of efficient energy supply • Improved livelihoods as a result of better services (education, health, communications, security and other social services that are largely dependent on electricity will be improved) • Benefits to youth and vulnerable groups (with continuous electricity supply, youth could develop skills and trade to enhance their livelihood, e.g., welding, carpentry, or other small businesses that rely on electricity).  Potential impacts during decommissioning phase  Negative impacts on the biophysical environment • Impacts of improper waste management may affect aesthetics, surface water, wildlife, livestock, and the public • Air Pollution and local air quality deterioration due operation of heavy machinery, and vehicles releasing hydrocarbon and incomplete combustion gases to the air.  Negative impacts on the human environment • Public health and safety risks • Risks of communicable diseases due to influx of foreign workers • Risks to occupational health and safety.  Positive impacts on the biophysical environment • Improvement of landscape due to reclamation of quarries, camp sites, and removal of disused structures returning the landscape to original state or even better.  Positive impacts on the human environment • Employment creation carrying out decommissioning activities; provide short-term employment for drivers, clearing workers, quarry restoration workers etc. Risk and accident assessment Based on the activities of the project during all the phases, potential risks were identified, and their significance evaluated based on severity, probability, exposure levels and possibility of control. The following risks were identified:  sabotage  movement and circulation risks such as traffic accidents  noise nuisance  vibration risks  risks related to improper use and storage of equipment  fires and explosions  personal injuries such as cuts, struck by objects, stepping on objects, falls  risks related to ergometrics; poor manual handling etc.  respiratory risks  insecurity from burglary, threats, and personal attacks  contagious illnesses, ingestion of contaminated food or drink  risks related to unethical workers (discriminating vulnerable PAPs, insensitivity to local norms, alcohol/drug abuse impacts etc.)  wildlife attacks (reptiles, insects, and animals etc.)  risks of work site conditions  work related stress.  Cummulative impacts This project may give rise to cumulative impacts on the biophysical and socioeconomic environment: • increased loss of land from multiple poles in one farmland and owned by one PAP; • simultaneous or consecutive development of roads and electricity infrastructure along the same corridor creating disturbance and associated effects such as increased loss of land, loss of arable soil quality on the work sites, felling and trimming of trees; • a combination of the importation of workers, equipment and introduction of new infrastructure at the same time in remote communities may create nuisances and risks that may be difficult to manage simultaneously; • introduction of additional transmission lines along existing corridors creating loss of income due to temporary displacement during works for health and safety reasons; • potential visual disturbance is likely where electricity transmission lines and lines of other services such as telecommunication cables compete for space; • the cumulative impact from potential public health and occupational health and safety risks associated with the project should be noted as various hazards will be present simultaneously during works, creating an environment for increased probability, frequency, and number of incidents. The more the number of workers and number of communities, the more the cumulative nature of the potential impacts; • considering the wide scope of the additional communities addressed in this ESIA, low impacts of the project in these villages in combination may lead to impacts of high significance. For example, where minor grievances are reported from a number of villages, the project and GRC will have to work effectively to manage problems and prevent further grievances in order to maintain credibility. Moreover, the total land-take of the project for the additional communities, combining the negligible land-take from each PAP, will be more significant.  Enhancement Measures for Potential Positive Impacts  Enhancement Measures for Positive Impacts During Pre-construction Phase: Human Environment • Creation of Temporary Jobs and Income Generation • Improved Community Cohesiveness  Enhancement Measures for Positive Impacts During Construction Phase: Human Environment • Employment and income generation  Enhancement Measures for Positive Impacts During Operation Phase: Biophysical Environment • reduction of green house gas emission  Enhancement Measures for Positive Impacts During Operation Phase: Human Environment • Employment • Economic Development as a result of Efficient Energy Supply • Improved Livelihoods as a Result of Better Services • Benefits to Youth and Vulnerable Groups from opportunities related to electricity access leading to improved livelihood • Increased Security  Enhancement Measures for Positive Impacts During Decommissioning Phase: Biophysical Environment • Improvement of Landscape  Enhancement Measures for Positive Impacts During Decommissioning Phase: Human Environment • Employment  Impact Mitigation during the Pre-construction Phase  Mitigation Measures of the Negative Impacts on the Biophysical Environment • Mitigation of Impacts related to Geology and Soils: Any quarries for this project must have clearance from the Geology Department (GD) and the NEA and will be based on a mining and reclamation plan. • Mitigation of Air Pollution: Prohibit the public from work sites and avoid public places such as schools and markets. Provide personal protective gears for workers and use well maintained vehicles and machinery. Camps must also be located at at least 500 m from the communities. • Mitigation of Noise and Vibration Nuisance: All preconstruction works must be carried out only during daytime and choose machines with less vibration effects. • Mitigation of Unsightly Landscape: sites must be cleared of all preconstruction waste and stockpile of materials located in organized camps. • Mitigation of Improper Waste Management: develop and implement a waste management plan. • Mitigation of Deforestation and the Loss of Fruit Trees: where trees must be fell or trimmed, develop, and implement a RAP to assess the potential losses and required compensation for reforestation; relocate poles within the maximum span to avoid trees. • Mitigation of Impacts on Fauna: Prohibit hunting by workers and educate on biodiversity conservation. The National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan shall be implemented in addition to biodiversity protection measures included in the C-ESMP. • Mitigation of Impacts on Wetlands: Integrate all mitigation measures into the design, including add-ons and evaluation of alternatives (routes, foundation types, pole designs, and cables).  Mitigation measures of the potential negative impacts on the human environment • Mitigation for Involuntary Resettlement and Loss of Livelihood: a RAP shall be developed and implemented for compensation of lost assets and livelihoods. • Mitigation for the impacts on vulnerable groups: vulnerable groups will be included to ensure non-discriminatory benefit sharing. • Mitigation for risks to public health and safety: use signage to prohibit access to worksite hazards and inform communities before works commence and throughout the implementation period. • Mitigation of violence against children: employment of children prohibited, and implementation of the Codes of Conduct on Violence against Children. • Mitigation of Risks to Occupational Health and Safety: adopt and implement a health and safety plan including accident and emergency response plans, training of workers, supervision, and provision of protection. • Mitigation of Risks of Communicable Diseases: Limit worker importation and enforce Codes of Conduct and Action Plan for Implementing ESHS and OHS Standards, and Preventing Gender Based Violence (GBV), Sexual Exploitation and Abuse, Sexual Harassment and Violence against Children. Abide by national emergency regulations and the WB guidelines for protection against the Corona Virus. • Mitigation for community instability: Initiate extensive consultations and sensitization with the communities. • Mitigation of impacts on sites of cultural and historical significance: avoid all sites of cultural or historical significance including any buffer created for their protection. Management of “Chance Finds” should be clarified in bidding documents.  Potential Impact Mitigation during the construction phase  Mitigation measures of the potential negative impacts on the biophysical environment • Mitigation of Surface Water Pollution: adjust pole spans to avoid water bodies and constant supervision to prevent waste dumping into water bodies. • Mitigation of Impacts on Wetlands and Loss of Aquatic Ecosystems: promote regrowth of vegetation within wetlands by ensuring sites are returned to near original state • Mitigation of Noise and Vibration Nuisance: All construction activities must be carried out only during daytime and choose machines with less vibration effects • Mitigation of Unsightly Landscape: sites must be cleared of all construction waste and excess materials. • Mitigation of Extreme Weather Impacts: Plan for pole erection during the dry season; train and supervise workers on response actions • Mitigation of Impacts related to the Importation of Workers: Limit importation of workers and use the GRM in case of complaints.  Mitigation measures of the negative impacts on the human environment • Mitigation of Impacts related to Public Health and Safety: prohibit access of the public to work sites, materials, and equipment; use qualified workers, give prior notice to communities, avoid school and market days • Mitigation of Risks of Communicable Diseases: Limit worker importation and enforce Codes of Conduct and Action Plan for Implementing ESHS and OHS Standards, and Preventing Gender Based Violence (GBV), Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Violence Against Children. Abide by national emergency regulations and the WB guidelines for protection against the Corona Virus. • Mitigation of Risks to Occupational Health and Safety: adopt and implement a health and safety plan including accident and emergency response plans, training of workers, supervision, and provision of protection. • Mitigation of Violence Against Children: employment of children prohibited, and implementation of the Codes of Conduct on Violence against Children. • Mitigation of Gender Based Violence: enforce the Codes of Conduct and Action Plan for Implementing ESHS and OHS Standards, and Preventing Gender Based Violence (GBV), Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) and Violence Against Children (VAC) • Mitigation of Land Use Impacts and Loss of Livelihoods: no displacement causing loss of livelihoods should take place until PAPs have been fully compensated: • Mitigation of Chance Finds Impacts: apply the Chance Find Procedures (avoid further disturbance and secure discovery, inform the relevant authorities) • Mitigation of Risks from Force Majeure: abide by any national emergency regulations passed by the Government of The Gambia during such periods.  Impact mitigation during the operation and maintenance phase  Mitigation measures of the negative impacts on the biophysical environment • Mitigation of effects of extreme weather conditions: routine inspection and maintenance shall reduce destruction of infrastructure during strong winds and heavy rainfall. • Mitigation of Impacts on Landscape and Aesthetics: All waste must be collected and disposed according to law; consider alternatives to prevent unsightly wires capes • Mitigation for Impacts on Trees: only trim branches within the ROW and not during the fruiting season. • Mitigation of Loss of Fauna: reproductive grounds, sanctuaries and migratory paths should be avoided, and alternative designs considered for the protection of the fauna.  Mitigation measures of the negative impacts on the human environment • Mitigation of Risks to Public Health and Safety: public education on the safety of electricity infrastructure and prohibition from work sites during pruning • Mitigation of Risks to Occupational Health and Safety: adopt and implement a health and safety program including accident and emergency response plans, training of workers, supervision, and provision of protection • Mitigation of Impacts on Public Services: prior to connection of the new infrastructure, the public must be informed well in advance about disruptions to electricity services.  Impact mitigation during the decommissioning phase  Mitigation measures of the negative impacts on the biophysical environment • Mitigation of Improper Waste Management: collect and dispose all waste according to law • Mitigation of Air Pollution: use protective gear and well serviced equipment and heavy vehicles.  Mitigation measures of the negative impacts on the human environment • Mitigation for risks to public health and safety: use signage to prohibit access to worksite hazards and inform communities before decommissioning works. • Mitigation of Risks of Communicable Diseases: Limit worker importation and enforce Codes of Conduct and Action Plan for Implementing ESHS and OHS Standards, and Preventing Gender Based Violence (GBV), Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Violence Against Children. Abide by national emergency regulations and the WB guidelines for protection against the Corona Virus. • Mitigation of violence against children: employment of children prohibited, and implementation of the Codes of Conduct on Violence Against Children. • Mitigation of Risks to Occupational Health and Safety: adopt and implement a health and safety program including accident and emergency response plans, training of workers, supervision, and provision of protection.  Risk and accident management Preventive and protective measures were recommended following the mitigation hierarchy from elimination, control, and reduction of the risks, to providing protection against the hazards. These include: Development and implementation of accidents and emergecny response plans including: • training ; • public information and awareness • constant supervision of workers • health and safety monitoring, reporting, and recording • limit exposure by reducing working hours • waste should never be burnt; follow waste management plan • use machines to assist in moving heavy and long loads • prohibit public access to work sites • no work at night • provision of first aid kits • provision of protective gear.  Mitigation of potential cumulative impacts • In general, full implementation of the ESMP to include amongst others, working outside the farming season, avoiding forests and unrelated removal of vegetation, strategically locate poles, develop and implement the C-ESMP, provide information and educate workers and villagers on health and safety will contribute towards the mitigation of potential cumulative impacts. • In general, Strategic Environmental Assessment of NAWEC’s electrification plans and programs can contribute in coordinating similar projects or different projects in the same area with the aim of mitigating the cumulative impacts. • multiple land loss on the same PAP may be mitigated by strategically spacing poles to achieve the technical requirements yet reducing effect on the same PAP; • where roads and electricity infrastructure are to be constructed along the same corridor the ESMP and C-ESMP will be implemented to address cumulative impacts; • risks from worker influx in combination with heavy machinery in remote communities shall be mitigated by community engagement and consultation on the risks and preventive measures; education of workers on acceptable conduct and highlight of penalties and disciplinary actions. • introduction of additional transmission lines along existing corridors (as exist from Brikama to Mandinaba) can be mitigated by future ESIA studies done and implemented at that time; • to reduce the effects of aesthetically unpleasing views resulting from wirescape, poles and lines shall be strategically located, including the consideration of underground networks; • the combined effect of individual impacts of low-significance over the number of villages shall be mitigated with the full implementation of the ESMP within the whole Project area of influence. Stakeholder consultations Stakeholders in all the project areas were adequately sensitized on matters relating to the consultations with the communities, project background, processes, and procedures as well as the role of the communities and institutions during the implementation of the project. In general stakeholders, including potential PAPs, highly appreciated and welcomed the project and highlighted the importance of electricity for the lives and livelihoods of the people, as well as the numerous benefits they will get from the availability of electricity. These benefits they maintained, would include their ability to preserve and store their different foodstuff, and enable them to engage in new revenue-earning businesses such as electricity-dependent professions like welding, that will raise their standard of living. The opinions, concerns and fears of the populations and persons likely to be affected by the project (PAPs) have been incorporated into the recommendations of this ESIA. Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) The potential impacts and mitigation measures identified for all the various activities are further expanded in an ESMP matrix. For ease of reference during implementation, each mitigation activity is considered along: • responsibilities for its mitigation (contractor, Owner Engineer, NAWEC, PIU, communities etc.); • period of expected mitigation (before, during or after the specific project activity); • responsibilities for monitoring (regional Technical Advisory Committees, NAWEC, NEA, PIU, Environmental Safeguards Specialist and Social Safeguards Specialist, DoF, DPWM etc.); • required budget for mitigation to ensure resources are available in a timely manner. Roles and responsibilities for ESMP implementation Implementation of the ESMP is the responsibility of the Contractor and PIU. Most of the mitigation measures are the responsibility of the Contractor who will be carrying out the works according to the C-ESMP that the Contractor will develop will be based on the project ESIA/ESMP. The ECOWAS-REAP PIU will be responsible for overall follow-up, and to ensure that the ESIA/ESMP is fully implemented with the support of the PIU Environmental Safeguards Specialist (ESS) and Social Safeguards Specialists (SSS). Specifically, the ECOWAS-REAP PIU will include E & S clauses in the Contractor’s agreements that will ensure compliance, and coordination with the GRM, among others. The supervising firm, Owner Engineer, will support the PIU in field supervision of all the contractors and their works. The Owner Engineer will also assist the PIU in bidding processes and verifies that contractors abide by clauses in the contracts. The communities will also have the responsibility of ensuring that villagers avoid work sites, and report to NAWEC or relevant authorities, issues of concern related to the project; the PIU and Contractor will engage the communities regularly as an oversight measure in this regard and conduct sensit|2025-03-11 13:59:13.0000000 +00:00|8|ECOREAP-P164044|Soma Feeder.Add
17|1|1|WCR|7|Background This report is the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) of the four ECOWAS-Regional Electricity Access Project (REAP) feeders that emanate from the Brikama sub-station under the OMVG Energy Project. The report is based specially on the 9 additional communities that the new corridors will pass through following the assessment of an initial 104 communities in 4 Districts in the West Coast Region (WCR). The REAP Project is part of a Series of Projects (SOP) being implemented within the ECOWAS region, with a long-term view to achieving electricity distribution expansion within the Region. Funded by the IDA/World Bank, the SOP aims to increase the number of people in West Africa with access to reliable and affordable electricity, as articulated in the ECOWAS White Paper of 2006 for Increasing Access to Energy Services to People of the Sub-region. The SOP consists of two Phases, which plan to provide 2.5 million people across six countries in West Africa, namely Guinea-Bissau, Niger, Mali, Senegal, Mauritania, Côte d’Ivoire, and The Gambia with electricity. Phase I of the SOP is to provide access to 1.1 million people in Guinea-Bissau, Mali, and The Gambia. This Phase will finance the expansion of Medium Voltage (MV) and Low Voltage (LV) networks from the two high-voltage 225/33 kV substations (in Soma, Lower River Region–LRR, and in Brikama, in WCR) being built under the OMVG Energy Project in The Gambia. It is expected that this will transform the power sectors of these countries and enable them to achieve their common objective of delivering more power to more consumers. The second Phase of the SOP will finance the reinforcement and extension of a similar distribution network (MV and LV) in Senegal, Niger, Cote d’Ivoire, Mali, and Mauritania, and within the context of the ECOWAS White Paper of 2006, additional member countries will be included later (potentially through additional financing). The participating countries will benefit from attracting larger contractors to ensure timely implementation, and furthermore, the regional approach facilitated by ECOWAS will be used to disseminate lessons learned from the World Bank’s global access experiences, which will be shared with participating countries to implement the access agenda. Description of the Project In The Gambia, the geographical extent of the project covers a maximum of 100 km radius from the OMVG Energy Project ’s substation in Brikama. Specifically, the scope of the works will include: 1. construction of 33/30 kV Medium Voltage (MV) lines 2. construction distribution substations of 33/30 kV / 400 Volts (V) 3. construction of 400 V Low Voltage (LV) lines 4. supply and installation of last-mile connection equipment, including service drops, prepaid meters, and ready boards for LV customers. Policy, legal and institutional framework The National Policy Framework The policies that will guide the implementation of the project include the following: i. National Development Plan (2018-2021) ; the principal national policy plan which proposes to increase the national coverage of electricity in the country ii. National Energy Policy (2014 – 2018) which aims Policy aims to increase electricity coverage nationally iii. Gambia Environment Action Plan, GEAP (2019-2029): Provides guidance in general environmental planning and natural resources management iv. The National Electricity Road Map (2017-2021 Road Map): It plans to improve power generation and transmission capacity of the National Water and Electricity Company (NAWEC). In addition, it aims to increase absorption capacity for the expected increase in generation capacity, and to reduce transmission and distribution losses v. Forestry Policy (2010-19) and the National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP), 2015 both of which promote State and community forest and biodiversity management. The Legal Framework This includes the following: i. National Environment Management Act, 1994 - the principal legislation in environmental management; Part V of Act provides for certain projects listed under Schedule A to be considered for ESIA, and it includes this Project ii. Environmental Quality Standards Regulations 1999 sets the standards in Schedule 1 in respect of ambient air, saline waters, surface fresh waters and groundwater iii. Biodiversity and Wildlife Act, 2003: provides for the establishment of protected areas for protection of in-situ biodiversity; in addition to protect ex-situ biodiversity iv. National Council for Arts and Culture Act, 2003 Act protects and preserve, restore any monument, relic, ethnographical article, or other article of archaeological ethnographical, or historical relevance. Project activities could unearth objects of historical relevance v. Land Acquisition & Compensation Act, 1990: Provides for consultation, resettlement, and compensation of land. World Bank Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project These include: i. OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment (including public participation and stakeholder engagement). The objective of this policy is to ensure that projects financed by the Bank are viable and environmentally feasible. It covers the impacts on the physical environment (air, water, and land, etc.); the living environment, health, and safety of populations; physical cultural resources; and environmental concerns at cross-border and global level ii. OP 4.04 Natural Habitats: Aims at protection, maintenance, rehabilitation of natural habitats and their functions. There are swamps, wetlands, and waterbodies along the Project corridor that are home to various invertebrates, mammalian, including avian fauna iii. OP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources: Avoid or mitigate adverse impacts on physical cultural resources iv. OP 4.12 Involuntary resettlement of populations: Aims to avoided where feasible or minimized. Where it is not feasible to avoid resettlement, develop RAP, providing sufficient investment resources to enable the persons displaced by the project to share in project benefits, among other things. v. OP 4.36 Forests: This Policy aims to harness the potential of forests to reduce poverty in a sustainable manner, integrate forests effectively into sustainable economic development, and protect the vital local and global environmental services and values of forests. The project is challenged by this OP as there are Forest Parks, and Community Forests that may be affected by its implementation. Institutional Framework The institutional framework relevant to the implementation of this project includes the following: i. National Environment Agency: The NEA enforces the NEMA, 1994 and EIA Regulations 2014, and reviews the ESIA report to grant Environmental Approval for the Project ii. National Water and Electricity Company (NAWEC): Project proponent, and will lead implementation of the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) iii. Women’s Bureau-Under the Ministry of Women, Children and Social Welfare, specifically promotes gender equity and women’s empowerment in The Gambia. It ensures the rights of women affected by the Project are protected; participates in sensitization on gender issues during pre-construction, construction, and operation phases iv. Department of Social Welfare: Protects and promotes the rights of vulnerable people such as children, women and the disabled; supports and guides the process during related grievances; participates in sensitization on GBV, SEA, SH, VAC, etc. v. Department of Labor: Enforces employment laws to protect employee rights, protect against child labor, and respond to complaints and reports such as accidents, abuse, and discrimination at work. Description of the baseline environmental and social issues The Biophysical Environment Physical environmental conditions including climate, hydrology (surface and ground water), topography and infrastructure were described to provide baseline for future reference. The vegetation type includes Riparian, Mangrove and Savannah vegetation; Fruits trees such as mango and cashew trees are also common in the Project area. Some of the most important Fauna in the Project area have been identified including mammals, avifauna, and reptiles, with their respective statuses on the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) red list for due conservation and protection. The Human Environment The baseline socioeconomic conditions of the affected communities include description of the modes of subsistence and daily chores in the project ’s area of influence such as gardening, trading, livestock rearing and fishing. Potential environmental and social impacts and risks  Potential impacts during pre-construction and construction phase  Negative impacts on the biophysical environment During activities of the pre-construction phase, no potential positive impact is anticipated on the biophysical environment. During the construction phase however, potential negative impacts on the biophysical environment will include: • impacts relating to geology and soils such as soil instability, landscape open to erosion, loss of vegetation on the land to be mined, compaction of access routes • air pollution • noise and vibration nuisance • unsightly landscape • improper waste • deforestation • loss of fruit trees and other vegetation • negative impacts on fauna such as resettlement due to disturbance or loss of sanctuaries and sources of food, and loss of fauna from hunting • Risks to Occupational Health and Safety (work place incidents/accident)  Negative impacts on the human environment • Involuntary resettlement and loss of livelihoods • Negligence of vulnerable groups and Gender-Based Violence (GBV) • Risks to Public Health and Safety • Negative impacts from Violence Against Children (VAC) • Risks to Occupational Health and Safety • Risks of Communicable Diseases • Community Instability and Reduced Cohesiveness (Including Impacts from Labor Influx) • Impacts on sites of cultural and historical significance such as loss or destruction of sensitive artifacts, conflict or breakage of social cohesion resulting from the loss or disturbance of sites of religious or traditional importance such as cemeteries and praying facilities.  Positive impacts on the biophysical environment There are no potential positive impacts of significance on the biophysical environment during the construction phase.  Positive impacts on the human environment • Creation of temporary jobs • Income generation • Improved community cohesiveness.  Potential impacts during operation and maintenance phase  Negative impacts on the biophysical environment • Effects of extreme weather affect applied loads and cause structural failure of various parts • Impacts on landscape- waste from disused and worn-out materials such as poles, lines will create eyesores if not collected from the sites and managed properly • Loss of Trees, especially fruit trees during pruning of trees • Loss of fauna, especially monkeys on non-insulated cables amputating limbs • Large birds with wider wingspans (such as certain eagles, waterfowl, cranes, hawks, and vultures) may get electrocuted or killed in contact with lines during flight or resting on the lines.  Negative impacts on the human environment • Risks to public health and safety where people encounter broken live lines during operation leading to electrocution or death • Occupational health and safety risks during all works, including operation and maintenance activities, workers are at risk of accidents from machinery, traffic, and illnesses. These include exposure of work crew to the risk of falling from heights during maintenance and repair of lines and accessing high trees during pruning Negative impacts on public services particularly during connection to the main substation and pole-mounted transformers, when there will be temporary disruption of power services to existing customers.  Positive impacts on the biophysical environment • Impact on Climate Change is positive since source of the power is renewable and thus shall contribute to the reduction of greenhouse gas emission.  Positive impacts on the human environment • Employment generation • Enhanced economic development because of efficient energy supply • Improved livelihoods because of better services (education, health, communications, security and other social services that are largely dependent on electricity will be improved) • Benefits to youth and vulnerable groups (with continuous electricity supply, youth could develop skills and trade to enhance their livelihood, e.g., welding, carpentry, or other small businesses that rely on electricity).  Potential impacts during decommissioning phase  Negative impacts on the biophysical environment • Impacts of improper waste management may affect aesthetics, surface water, wildlife, livestock, and the public • Air Pollution and local air quality deterioration due operation of heavy machinery, and vehicles releasing hydrocarbon and incomplete combustion gases to the air.  Negative impacts on the human environment • Public health and safety risks • Risks of communicable diseases due to influx of foreign workers • Risks to occupational health and safety.  Positive impacts on the biophysical environment • Improvement of landscape due to reclamation of quarries, camp sites, and removal of disused structures returning the landscape to original state or even better.  Positive impacts on the human environment • Employment creation carrying out decommissioning activities; provide short-term employment for drivers, clearing workers, quarry restoration workers etc.  Risk and accident assessment Based on the activities of the project during all the phases, potential risks were identified, and their significance evaluated based on severity, probability, exposure levels and possibility of control. The following risks were identified:  sabotage  movement and circulation risks such as traffic accidents  noise nuisance  vibration risks  risks related to improper use and storage of equipment  fires and explosions  personal injuries such as cuts, struck by objects, stepping on objects, falls  risks related to ergometrics; poor manual handling etc.  respiratory risks  insecurity from burglary, threats, and personal attacks  contagious illnesses, ingestion of contaminated food or drink  risks related to unethical workers (discriminating vulnerable PAPs, insensitivity to local norms, alcohol/drug abuse impacts etc.)  wildlife attacks (reptiles, insects, and animals etc.)  risks of work site conditions  work related stress.  Cummulative impacts This project may give rise to cumulative impacts on the biophysical and socioeconomic environment: • increased loss of land from multiple poles in one farmland and owned by one PAP; • simultaneous or consecutive development of roads and electricity infrastructure along the same corridor creating disturbance and associated effects such as increased loss of land, loss of arable soil quality on the work sites, felling and trimming of trees; • a combination of the importation of workers, equipment and introduction of new infrastructure at the same time in remote communities may create nuisances and risks that may be difficult to manage simultaneously; • introduction of additional transmission lines along existing corridors creating loss of income due to temporary displacement during works for health and safety reasons; • potential visual disturbance is likely where electricity transmission lines and lines of other services such as telecommunication cables compete for space; • the cumulative impact from potential public health and occupational health and safety risks associated with the project should be noted as various hazards will be present simultaneously during works, creating an environment for increased probability, frequency, and number of incidents. The more the number of workers and number of communities, the more the cumulative nature of the potential impacts; • considering the wide scope of the additional communities addressed in this ESIA, low impacts of the project in these villages in combination may lead to impacts of high significance. For example, where minor grievances are reported from a number of villages, the project and GRC will have to work effectively to manage problems and prevent further grievances in order to maintain credibility. Moreover, the total land-take of the project for the additional communities, combining the negligible land-take from each PAP, will be more significant. Impact Management (Enhancement and Mitigation Measures)  Enhancement Measures for Potential Positive Impacts  Enhancement Measures for Positive Impacts During Pre-construction Phase: Human Environment • Creation of Temporary Jobs and Income Generation • Improved Community Cohesiveness  Enhancement Measures for Positive Impacts During Construction Phase: Human Environment • Employment and income generation  Enhancement Measures for Positive Impacts During Operation Phase: Biophysical Environment • reduction of green house gas emission  Enhancement Measures for Positive Impacts During Operation Phase: Human Environment • Employment • Economic Development as a result of Efficient Energy Supply • Improved Livelihoods as a Result of Better Services • Benefits to Youth and Vulnerable Groups from opportunities related to electricity access leading to improved livelihood • Increased Security  Enhancement Measures for Positive Impacts During Decommissioning Phase: Biophysical Environment • Improvement of Landscape  Enhancement Measures for Positive Impacts During Decommissioning Phase: Human Environment • Employment  Impact Mitigation during the Pre-construction Phase  Mitigation Measures of the Negative Impacts on the Biophysical Environment • Mitigation of Impacts related to Geology and Soils: Any quarries for this project must have clearance from the Geology Department (GD) and the NEA and will be based on a mining and reclamation plan. • Mitigation of Air Pollution: Prohibit the public from work sites and avoid public places such as schools and markets. Provide personal protective gears for workers and use well maintained vehicles and machinery. Camps must also be located at least 500 m from the communities. • Mitigation of Noise and Vibration Nuisance: All preconstruction works must be carried out only during daytime and choose machines with less vibration effects. • Mitigation of Unsightly Landscape: sites must be cleared of all preconstruction waste and stockpile of materials located in organized camps. • Mitigation of Improper Waste Management: develop and implement a waste management plan. • Mitigation of Deforestation and the Loss of Fruit Trees: where trees must be fell or trimmed, develop, and implement a RAP to assess the potential losses and required compensation for reforestation; relocate poles within the maximum span to avoid trees. • Mitigation of Impacts on Fauna: Prohibit hunting by workers and educate on biodiversity conservation. The National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan shall be implemented in addition to biodiversity protection measures included in the C-ESMP. • Mitigation of Impacts on Wetlands: Integrate all mitigation measures into the design, including add-ons and evaluation of alternatives (routes, foundation types, pole designs, and cables).  Mitigation measures of the potential negative impacts on the human environment • Mitigation for Involuntary Resettlement and Loss of Livelihood: a RAP shall be developed and implemented for compensation of lost assets and livelihoods. • Mitigation for the impacts on vulnerable groups: vulnerable groups will be included to ensure non-discriminatory benefit sharing. • Mitigation for risks to public health and safety: use signage to prohibit access to worksite hazards and inform communities before works commence and throughout the implementation period. • Mitigation of violence against children: employment of children prohibited, and implementation of the Codes of Conduct on Violence against Children. • Mitigation of Risks to Occupational Health and Safety: adopt and implement a health and safety plan including accident and emergency response plans, training of workers, supervision, and provision of protection. • Mitigation of Risks of Communicable Diseases: Limit worker importation and enforce Codes of Conduct and Action Plan for Implementing ESHS and OHS Standards, and Preventing Gender Based Violence (GBV), Sexual Exploitation and Abuse, Sexual Harassment and Violence against Children. Abide by national emergency regulations and the WB guidelines for protection against the Corona Virus. • Mitigation for community instability: Initiate extensive consultations and sensitization with the communities. • Mitigation of impacts on sites of cultural and historical significance: avoid all sites of cultural or historical significance including any buffer created for their protection. Management of “Chance Finds” should be clarified in bidding documents.  Impact mitigation during the construction phase  Mitigation measures of the potential negative impacts on the biophysical environment • Mitigation of Surface Water Pollution: adjust pole spans to avoid water bodies and constant supervision to prevent waste dumping into water bodies. • Mitigation of Impacts on Wetlands and Loss of Aquatic Ecosystems: promote regrowth of vegetation within wetlands by ensuring sites are returned to near original state • Mitigation of Noise and Vibration Nuisance: All construction activities must be carried out only during daytime and choose machines with less vibration effects • Mitigation of Unsightly Landscape: sites must be cleared of all construction waste and excess materials. • Mitigation of Extreme Weather Impacts: Plan for pole erection during the dry season; train and supervise workers on response actions • Mitigation of Impacts related to the Importation of Workers: Limit importation of workers and use the GRM in case of complaints.  Mitigation measures of the negative impacts on the human environment • Mitigation of Impacts related to Public Health and Safety: prohibit access of the public to work sites, materials, and equipment; use qualified workers, give prior notice to communities, avoid school and market days • Mitigation of Risks of Communicable Diseases: Limit worker importation and enforce Codes of Conduct and Action Plan for Implementing ESHS and OHS Standards, and Preventing Gender Based Violence (GBV), Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Violence Against Children. Abide by national emergency regulations and the WB guidelines for protection against the Corona Virus. • Mitigation of Risks to Occupational Health and Safety: adopt and implement a health and safety plan including accident and emergency response plans, training of workers, supervision, and provision of protection. • Mitigation of Violence Against Children: employment of children prohibited, and implementation of the Codes of Conduct on Violence against Children. • Mitigation of Gender Based Violence: enforce the Codes of Conduct and Action Plan for Implementing ESHS and OHS Standards, and Preventing Gender Based Violence (GBV), Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) and Violence Against Children (VAC) • Mitigation of Land Use Impacts and Loss of Livelihoods: no displacement causing loss of livelihoods should take place until PAPs have been fully compensated: • Mitigation of Chance Finds Impacts: apply the Chance Find Procedures (avoid further disturbance and secure discovery, inform the relevant authorities) • Mitigation of Risks from Force Majeure: abide by any national emergency regulations passed by the Government of The Gambia during such periods.  Impact mitigation during the operation and maintenance phase  Mitigation measures of the negative impacts on the biophysical environment • Mitigation of effects of extreme weather conditions: routine inspection and maintenance shall reduce destruction of infrastructure during strong winds and heavy rainfall. • Mitigation of Impacts on Landscape and Aesthetics: All waste must be collected and disposed according to law; consider alternatives to prevent unsightly wires capes • Mitigation for Impacts on Trees: only trim branches within the ROW and not during the fruiting season. • Mitigation of Loss of Fauna: reproductive grounds, sanctuaries and migratory paths should be avoided, and alternative designs considered for the protection of the fauna.  Mitigation measures of the negative impacts on the human environment • Mitigation of Risks to Public Health and Safety: public education on the safety of electricity infrastructure and prohibition from work sites during pruning • Mitigation of Risks to Occupational Health and Safety: adopt and implement a health and safety program including accident and emergency response plans, training of workers, supervision, and provision of protection • Mitigation of Impacts on Public Services: prior to connection of the new infrastructure, the public must be informed well in advance about disruptions to electricity services.  Impact mitigation during the decommissioning phase  Mitigation measures of the negative impacts on the biophysical environment • Mitigation of Improper Waste Management: collect and dispose all waste according to law • Mitigation of Air Pollution: use protective gear and well serviced equipment and heavy vehicles.  Mitigation measures of the negative impacts on the human environment • Mitigation for risks to public health and safety: use signage to prohibit access to worksite hazards and inform communities before decommissioning works. • Mitigation of Risks of Communicable Diseases: Limit worker importation and enforce Codes of Conduct and Action Plan for Implementing ESHS and OHS Standards, and Preventing Gender Based Violence (GBV), Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Violence Against Children. Abide by national emergency regulations and the WB guidelines for protection against the Corona Virus. • Mitigation of violence against children: employment of children prohibited, and implementation of the Codes of Conduct on Violence Against Children. • Mitigation of Risks to Occupational Health and Safety: adopt and implement a health and safety program including accident and emergency response plans, training of workers, supervision, and provision of protection.  Risk and accident management Preventive and protective measures were recommended following the mitigation hierarchy from elimination, control, and reduction of the risks, to providing protection against the hazards. These include: Development and implementation of accidents and emergecny response plans including: • training ; • public information and awareness • constant supervision of workers • health and safety monitoring, reporting, and recording • limit exposure by reducing working hours • waste should never be burnt; follow waste management plan • use machines to assist in moving heavy and long loads • prohibit public access to work sites • no work at night • provision of first aid kits • provision of protective gear.  Mitigation of potential cumulative impacts • In general, full implementation of the ESMP to include amongst others, working outside the farming season, avoiding forests and unrelated removal of vegetation, strategically locate poles, develop and implement the C-ESMP, provide information and educate workers and villagers on health and safety will contribute towards the mitigation of potential cumulative impacts. • In general, Strategic Environmental Assessment of NAWEC’s electrification plans and programs can contribute in coordinating similar projects or different projects in the same area with the aim of mitigating the cumulative impacts. • multiple land loss on the same PAP may be mitigated by strategically spacing poles to achieve the technical requirements yet reducing effect on the same PAP; • where roads and electricity infrastructure are to be constructed along the same corridor the ESMP and C-ESMP will be implemented to address cumulative impacts; • risks from worker influx in combination with heavy machinery in remote communities shall be mitigated by community engagement and consultation on the risks and preventive measures; education of workers on acceptable conduct and highlight of penalties and disciplinary actions. • introduction of additional transmission lines along existing corridors (as exist from Brikama to Mandinaba) can be mitigated by future ESIA studies done and implemented at that time; • to reduce the effects of aesthetically unpleasing views resulting from wirescape, poles and lines shall be strategically located, including the consideration of underground networks; • the combined effect of individual impacts of low-significance over the number of villages shall be mitigated with the full implementation of the ESMP within the whole Project area of influence. Stakeholder consultations Stakeholders in all the project areas were adequately sensitized on matters relating to the consultations with the communities, project background, processes, and procedures as well as the role of the communities and institutions during the implementation of the project. In general stakeholders, including potential PAPs, highly appreciated and welcomed the project and highlighted the importance of electricity for the lives and livelihoods of the people, as well as the numerous benefits they will get from the availability of electricity. These benefits they maintained, would include their ability to preserve and store their different foodstuff, and enable them to engage in new revenue-earning businesses such as electricity-dependent professions like welding, that will raise their standard of living. The opinions, concerns and fears of the populations and persons likely to be affected by the project (PAPs) have been incorporated into the recommendations of this ESIA. Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) The potential impacts and mitigation measures identified for all the various activities are further expanded in an ESMP matrix. For ease of reference during implementation, each mitigation activity is considered along: • responsibilities for its mitigation (contractor, Owner Engineer, NAWEC, PIU, communities etc.); • period of expected mitigation (before, during or after the specific project activity); • responsibilities for monitoring (regional Technical Advisory Committees, NAWEC, NEA, PIU, Environmental Safeguards Specialist and Social Safeguards Specialist, DoF, DPWM etc.); • required budget for mitigation to ensure resources are available in a timely manner. Roles and responsibilities for ESMP implementation Implementation of the ESMP is the responsibility of the Contractor and PIU. Most of the mitigation measures are the responsibility of the Contractor who will be carrying out the works according to the C-ESMP that the Contractor will develop based on the project ESIA/ESMP. The ECOWAS-REAP PIU will be responsible for overall follow-up, and to ensure that the ESIA/ESMP is fully implemented with the support of the PIU Environmental Safeguards Specialist (ESS) and Social Safeguards Specialists (SSS). Specifically, the ECOWAS-REAP PIU will include E&S clauses in the Contractor’s agreements that will ensure compliance, and coordination with the GRM, among others. The supervising firm, Owner Engineer, will support the PIU in field supervision of all the contractors and their works. The Owner Engineer will also assist the PIU in bidding processes and verifies that contractors abide by clauses in the contracts. The communities will also have the responsibility of ensuring that villagers avoid work sites, and report to NAWEC or relevant authorities, issues of concern related to the project; the PIU and Contractor will engage the communities regularly as an oversight measure in this regard and conduct sensitization sessions to ensure communities are aware of reporting measures and understand p|2025-03-11 13:59:13.0000000 +00:00|8|ECOREAP-P164044|ECO-TBT
