Background The environmental and social policies of the World Bank (WB) and European Investment Bank (EIB) require the Gambia Electricity Restoration and Modernization Project (GERMP) to conduct an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) with an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) in line with WB’s Operational Policy/Bank Procedure 4.01, Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and EIB’s Environmental and Social Standard 1, Assessment and Management of Environmental Social Impacts and Risks (ESS1). Other applicable WB policies and EIB standards are indicated in section 4.1.3. Where policy discrepancies exist in the implementation of this project, the relevant policies that are more stringent will prevail. GERMP Project Description and Development Objective The project development objective (PDO) is to increase the availability and reliability of electricity supply through solar energy and improve NAWEC’s capacity to dispatch variable renewable electricity. It is one of three components of the Gambia Electricity Restoration and Modernization Project (GERMP) which is the focus of this ESIA.1 The GERMP is a $121 million multi-donor funded project involving the World Bank (WB), European Union (EU), and the European Investment Bank (EIB). Specifically, the WB and EIB are supporting development of the solar PV plant and the reinforcement of some transmission and distribution networks within the Country. The solar component will involve the development of a 20 MW on-grid solar PV plant on a 23ha plot of land allocated by the Ministry of Lands and Regional Governments (MOLRG), at Jambur in the West Coast Region (WCR) of The Gambia. This site is believed to be capable of hosting the necessary installations for such capacity of power generation. Project Elements Specifically, the proposed solar PV plant will consist of the following main components: i. Solar field: Main components of the PV power plant or “solar field” consists of a large group of semiconductors technology-based silicon solar cells arranged in what is known as solar PV panel or solar module. The solar panels will convert impinging sunrays (photons) to electrons, whose flow generates direct current (DC) which gets collected and channelled into an “inverter” to convert the DC current into Alternating Current (AC), the form of electricity usable by consumers. ii. Racking: These are structural components which support the PV panels. They could be fixed or movable using a “tracking system”. iii. Tracking: This is a mechanical system attached to the racking system which enables it to track the sun’s movement during the day. It could be a single or dual axis tracking system. iv. Other electromechanical system components include cables, inverters, transformers, and switchgear used to control and condition the power output of the solar field. 1 The GERMP consists of three components. This ESMP covers only Component 1, the on-grid solar plant. 1. Component 1: On-grid solar photo voltaic plant with battery backup 2. Component 2: Transmission and distribution (T&D) upgrades 3. Component 3: Institutional strengthening and project implementation support v. Other ancillary facilities: Buildings, including substations, guard cabin, office, sanitary facilities and spare parts storage; site access road and internal access network; water supply; drainage etc. Project Activities a) Activities expected during the planning and construction phase • Preparation of a detailed design for the project • Land clearing and preparation of production area • Transportation of the various project components to the site • Installation of panels, inverters and batteries • Building of transformer, control, storage and other utility rooms • Connecting the solar plant to the NAWEC grid b) Activities expected during the operations phase • Management of the electricity production • Cleaning of panels and maintenance of other fixtures • Cleaning and clearing site of vegetation that have regrown c) Activities expected during the decommissioning phase • Dismantling of installations • Transportation of equipment and materials away from site • Management of disused elements and the site after use for the solar plant Assessment of Project Alternatives Alternative Sites The original GERMP concept outlined two site options for the solar PV component; the current proposed project of about 23ha in Jambur, to accommodate a 20 MW plant, or three to four plants of 3-6MW at various sites. In addition, the draft feasibility study report for the Solar PV Plant mentioned two other potential alternative sites adjacent to the Brikama Power Stations, but these were not explored by NAWEC. The Jambur site was ultimately the preferred site option because of the difficulty in the availability of the requisite type and size of land at 3-4 different sites within the Greater Banjul Area (GBA) and WCR, among other reasons. Choice of Design Options The choice for the design of the solar PV Plant is based, among other things, on the available budget for the planned 20 MW DC capacity, which has determined the choice of technology adopted in this project. Essentially, the choice is based on market practices, operational risks and technology maturity, which means that this preferred option of technology will attempt to maximise the planned DC capacity. Whilst there are other options to select from, the designers recommended that whichever option is selected, it should be well backed-up by corresponding securities and warranties to mitigate for high operational risks. Regarding the choice of components and sizing therefore, the design analysed the types and cost of the materials including modules, inverters and mounting system. The “No Project” Alternative The alternative of having the project, particularly with full implementation of the environmental and social safeguards, will create a more favourable scenario over the “No Project” alternative. The positive impacts of the Project will enhance the socio-economic development of the Country, enhance access to electricity services to communities, and contribute to the reduction of greenhouse gas production related to the use of hydrocarbons for electricity generation. Potential Positive Impacts With effective and efficient project implementation, the following benefits are expected: 1. A large number of experts and unskilled workers (mainly men) will be employed on the project, with associated social benefits and improved living standards as elaborated in Section 6.2 2. Economic development and income generation from renewable energy supply will benefit the entire Country, including the project affected persons. Like other citizens, PAPs will benefit from development programmes possible as a result of general enhancement of the national economy from available energy for services and production; and savings from the use of renewable energy. 3. The Gambia’s use of locally available renewable resources will reduce its dependence on imported and expensive fossil fuels. 4. The common problems associated with air pollution, oil and oily sludge wastes from petroleum powered generators will be avoided. 5. Temporary economic improvement of women in the immediate vicinity of the project site will be attained through commercial activities targeting project workers as is common in most major construction sites such as the proposed solar project. 6. With continuous electricity supply in Jambur, the youth could develop skills and trade including welding, carpentry, or other small businesses that rely on electricity to enhance their livelihood. 7. Employment creation for technology transfer and capacity building of NAWEC staff and relevant stakeholders in managing the solar installations will be improved for sustainability. There will also be possibilities for employment of the youth of Jambur at the facility when labour is sourced locally 8. Installation of the first utility on-grid solar plant in The Gambia will significantly contribute to the promotion of Jambur in terms of improved potential and development. 9. Education, health, communications and other social services that are largely dependent on electricity will be improved; with availability of electricity both locally and nationally, students will be able to stay up longer to read, and other social services such as health centers, clinics and national communication infrastructure will be more efficient. 10. Contribution to the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions and other air pollutants through renewable energy will be enhanced. Roles and Responsibilities for ESMP Implementation The implementation of this ESMP will be the overall responsibility of NAWEC, and more specifically, the PCU. Other stakeholders will also play important roles, although these will have to be initiated by the PCU or NEA as the coordinating and oversight bodies respectively. NEA, with support from the EIA Working Group will be responsible for overall external monitoring of the ESMP implementation. NEA’s mandate is to monitor the national environment, and so in collaboration with the PCU environmental safeguard specialists, can also monitor compliance with the Banks’ policies as they relate to the environmental aspects of this project. In addition, NEA will provide technical support and participate in training and sensitization of stakeholders to enhance understanding of the national and the Banks’ environmental safeguard instruments. Although the NEA has inadequate capacity to monitor the social aspects interlinked with the environment, it is required by the National Environment Management Act, 1994, that NEA liaises with any necessary institution (ministries, departments, agencies, non-governmental and intergovernmental organizations etc.) to ensure that all environment related concerns are addressed during planning and implementation. Institutions represented in the EIA Working Group, on full-time or ad hoc basis as necessary, may also include those specialised in social aspects such as the Women’s Bureau, Department of Social Welfare, Department of Labour, and Department of Health Services amongst others. Meanwhile, monitoring implementation of the social aspects of the project in line with the Bank’s safeguard instruments will be the responsibility of the PCU social safeguards specialist. At the preparatory stage of the works, other national institutions will also be required to offer mainly technical advice and/or regulatory information; the Department of Forestry (DOF) and Department of Parks and Wildlife Management (DPWM) will eventually be responsible for all forest and biodiversity related issues respectively, especially in view of the close proximity of the solar field to the Bamba Forest Park. The Department of Physical Planning and Housing (DPPH) and Department of Lands and Surveys (DLS), under the Ministry of Lands and Regional Governments (MOLRG), will be addressing resettlement issues. The Local Authorities and PAPs are also relevant during the preparatory stage of the works, as they can provide valuable information to assist in the planning of the works. In addition, the Ministry of Petroleum and Energy (MOPE) and the Public Utility Regulatory Authority (PURA) will respectively provide policy oversight and standards regulation over NAWEC. A local NGO, Association of Farmer Educators and Trainers (AFET), is the independent watchdog.